SIMD-0133: Syscall: Get Epoch Stake (#133)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0133-syscall-get-epoch-stake.md

chain. The priority of a new design should be making the data available to
on-chain programs.

## New Terminology

N/A.

## Detailed Design

The specification for the proposed syscall is as follows:

```c
/**
 * Retrieves the total active stake delegated to a vote account for the current
 * epoch.
 *
 * @param vote_addr     A pointer to 32 bytes representing the vote address.
 * @return              A 64-bit unsigned integer representing the total
 *                      active stake delegated to the vote account at the
 *                      provided address.
 */
uint64_t sol_get_epoch_stake(/* r1 */ void const * vote_addr);
```

If the provided vote address corresponds to an account that is not a vote
account or does not exist, the syscall will write `0` for active stake. 

### Control Flow

The syscall aborts the virtual machine if not all bytes in VM memory range
`[vote_addr, vote_addr + 32)` are readable.

Otherwise, the syscall returns a `u64` integer representing the total active
stake delegated to the vote account at the provided address.

If the provided vote address corresponds to an account that is not a vote

> account or does not exist, the syscall will return `0` for active stake.

Author: Thanks. Removed.

amount of validators in one Solana cluster could surpass this number in the
future.

Exposing epoch-stake information through a syscall avoids this account maximum
size constraint. While the syscall approach does not offer the easy off-chain
retrieval of a sysvar, there are existing ways to get epoch-stake data off
chain. The priority of a new design should be making the data available to
on-chain programs.

## New Terminology

N/A.

## Detailed Design

The specification for the proposed syscall is as follows:

```c
/**
 * Retrieves the total active stake delegated to a vote account for the current
 * epoch.
 *
 * @param var_addr      VM memory address to copy the retrieved data to.
 * @param vote_address  A pointer to 32 bytes representing the vote address.
 * @return              A 64-bit unsigned integer error code:
 *                        - 0 if the operation is successful.
 *                        - Non-zero error code.
 *
 * If the operation is not successful, data will not be written to the
 * provided VM memory address.
 */
uint64_t sol_get_epoch_stake(
  /* r1 */ uint8_t *    var_addr,
  /* r2 */ void const * vote_address,

> );

Author: It does not break any existing patterns for existing syscalls, since they all seem to do
things differently.

For example, many cryptographic syscalls - such as `sol_curve_multiscalar_mul` -
use `1` to indicate an `Option::None` response from curve calculation.

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/b1e17998b64203fe62f52efe3fe5ba87706ed446/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/mod.rs#L1180-L1189

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/b1e17998b64203fe62f52efe3fe5ba87706ed446/zk-token-sdk/src/curve25519/ristretto.rs#L227-L242

While others - such as `sol_secp256k1_recover` - use the integer value to map specific errors,
thrown intentionally based on computation. Note these are separate from errors such as memory
access or unavailable data (like in sysvars).

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/b1e17998b64203fe62f52efe3fe5ba87706ed446/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/mod.rs#L842-L853

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/b1e17998b64203fe62f52efe3fe5ba87706ed446/sdk/program/src/secp256k1_recover.rs#L409-L422

Finally, a handful of syscalls - such as `sol_remaining_compute_units` simply return the
value in the resulting `u64`, as you've mentioned.

https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/b1e17998b64203fe62f52efe3fe5ba87706ed446/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/mod.rs#L1735-L1753

> );

Author: I've added a commit changing this syscall to return the data directly, in the interest of saving a memory access.

```

`var_addr` must be the starting address of 8 bytes of writable VM memory to
store the `u64` response. If not, the syscall will abort the VM with an access
violation.

If the provided vote address corresponds to an account that is not a vote

> account or does not exist, the syscall will write `0` for active stake. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
account or does not exist, the syscall will write `0` for active stake. 

This syscall consumes `syscall_base_cost` compute units always.

```

Author: Seems like it should maybe be `syscall_base_cost + cost_of(u64)`.

Currently, we charge `syscall_base_cost + cost_of(T)` to write sysvar `T` to VM memory.. Should this `u64` be the same?

Author: Gotcha. I was taking a look at sysvars, which is `sysvar_base` plus one CU per byte written.
https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/e2d34d375bad87a95cdfbe4b07163bb13515bfeb/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/sysvar.rs#L10-L16

Note `sysvar_base` and `syscall_base` are the same (`100`) right now, for what it's worth.

I was also checking out some that use length, like `set_return_data`.
https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/e2d34d375bad87a95cdfbe4b07163bb13515bfeb/programs/bpf_loader/src/syscalls/mod.rs#L1249-L1255

I think the latter makes the most sense for 127. Here we can use a similar concept but make things static since it's always going to read a 32-byte address and return an 8-byte integer. Maybe:

```
syscall_base + (32 / cpi_per_u) + (8 / cpi_per_u)
```

Author: Just wanted to point out that as per SIMD 0127, this calculation _could_ be:

```
max(sysvar_base, (32 / cpi_per_u) + (length / cpi_per_u))
```

But in this case length is always `8`, so we'd get `max(100, 0.16)`, so we can just charge `(32 / cpi_per_u) + (length / cpi_per_u)` constantly.

Author: With the above being said, as well as https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/127#discussion_r1546374161:

```
syscall_base + (32/cpi_per_u) + mem_op_base
```

feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

A syscall to retrieve a vote account's delegated stake for the current epoch.

## Motivation

Currently, on-chain programs have no knowledge of the current epoch's stake and
how much active stake is delegated to a certain vote account.

If this data was available for querying by on-chain programs, it would unblock
many use cases, such as validator governance and secondary consensus mechanisms,
that were previously not possible on Solana.

Additionally, this would enable the Feature Gate program defined in
[SIMD 0089](./0089-programify-feature-gate.md) to tally vote account stake in
support for a pending feature gate.

## Alternatives Considered

An alternative design has been proposed in the past for using an on-chain sysvar
account to store all of the current epoch's stake. It was proposed in
[SIMD 0056](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/56).

Using a sysvar account to store even just the current epoch's stake introduces a
size limitation on the number of entries that can be stored, which the number of
validators on Solana could surpass in the future.

> By offering access to this information through only a syscall, we can avoid this
> account maximum size constraint. However, the syscall approach also makes the
> data more cumbersome to retrieve off-chain than the sysvar approach.
> 
> While retrieving this data off-chain may not be straightforward, it remains
> entirely feasible. Conversely, on-chain programs currently do not have this
> capability at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Exposing epoch-stake information through a syscall avoids this
account maximum size constraint. While the syscall approach does not offer the 
easy off-chain retrieval of a sysvar, there are existing ways
to get epoch-stake data off chain. The priority of a new design should be making the data available to on-chain programs.
```
I think this is what you're trying to say.

Author: Yeah, exactly, thanks.

## New Terminology

N/A.

## Detailed Design

The specification for the proposed syscall is as follows:

```c
/**
 * Retrieves the total active stake delegated to a vote account for the current
 * epoch.
 *
 * @param var_addr      VM memory address to copy the retrieved data to.

>  * @param vote_address  The vote account whose stake to query.

Author: Lmk if what I've updated the parameter definition with makes sense, or if you were thinking we should change the type from being a pointer.

>  * @param vote_address  The vote account whose stake to query.

Reviewer 2: It looks like there are examples of both approaches to passing Pubkeys in existing syscalls, so I'm fine with the pointer.

 * Retrieves the total active stake delegated to a vote account for the current
 * epoch.
 *
 * @param vote_addr     A pointer to 32 bytes representing the vote address.
 * @return              A 64-bit unsigned integer representing the total
 *                      active stake delegated to the vote account at the
 *                      provided address.
 */
uint64_t sol_get_epoch_stake(/* r1 */ void const * vote_addr);
```

### Control Flow

The syscall aborts the virtual machine if not all bytes in VM memory range
`[vote_addr, vote_addr + 32)` are readable.

Otherwise, the syscall returns a `u64` integer representing the total active
stake delegated to the vote account at the provided address.

If the provided vote address corresponds to an account that is not a vote
account or does not exist, the syscall will return `0` for active stake.

### Compute Unit Usage

The syscall will always attempt to consume the same amount of CUs regardless of
control flow.

```

> syscall_base + (32/cpi_per_u) + mem_op_base

Reviewer: ```suggestion
syscall_base + floor(32/cpi_bytes_per_unit) + mem_op_base
```

```

- `syscall_base`: Base cost of a sysvall.

> - `cpi_per_u`: Number of account data bytes per CU charged during CPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `cpi_bytes_per_units`: Number of account data bytes per CU charged during CPI.
- `mem_op_base`: Base cost of a memory operation syscall.
```
